- The template pattern is one of the most common patterns
that you will see throughout the entire Spring framework.
In Spring we use the template pattern
for almost every remote system call
that can be made unless of course you want to roll your own,
but with the template pattern there's no reason to do so.
The temple pattern provides common behavior
that spans across concrete implementations of remote calls.
So in a database world, we would have a database template
that would span all of the different flavors of RDBMS
and that's called a JDBC template.
Now in addition to providing common behavior
that spans concrete implementations of remote calls,
the template pattern in Spring also shares
a similar behavior across remote calls throughout
the way the templates are structured.
So what do I mean by that?
What you will see is the JDBC template
has very similar behavior to the JMS template
which also has very similar behavior to the RestTemplate.
So not only do we get similar behavior
across concrete implementations of the same functionality,
we also get it across different flavors of remote calls.
So as I alluded to, we see it with JDBC,
we see it with JMS we see it with REST,
and there are other template patterns that can be used.
In addition you can create your own template pattern
that works in this manner within the Spring framework,
and often times third-party developers
will do that for their products.
Now how does this pattern actually work in a nutshell?
So you take common boilerplate code, common operations,
and you hide them in an abstract base class.
The common flows that are always captured
in this overarching algorithm and what you do then
is you take and make abstract methods
for the variations in code and you call those
from those overarching algorithm.
This becomes really really clear when we look
at what it takes to make a JDBC call.
And we'll get into that in here in a little bit.
So the concrete implementations handle
the variants of code and extend that common base class.
So why would we want to do this?
So most often these common code paths
lead to code replication and by using templates
you encourage the concepts of don't repeat yourself
and code reuse.
Error-prone code therefore can be solved once
and reused across multiple implementations
when they all behave in the exact same manner,
or at least the same enough
that we can templatize their behavior.
Common task semantics can be templatized
to reduce costs as well, because implementing new versions
of the same pathway tend to be expensive and repetitive.
So by using templates we can actually reduce
the overall cost of development.
So how would we go about creating a template.
You're going to start with a base abstract class.
You're going to define the template method.
And you're going to implement your algorithm.
Now the key here is that you want to extract,
in that shared code path all of the abstract methods
that your implementations will need to execute.
So your algorithm will call those methods
even though they're not implemented until you get
to the concrete implementations.
Now this template method needs to usually be marked as final
because we don't want people modifying the template
or else that really defeats the purpose of it.
Now when we get to our concrete implementations,
you're going to implement the abstract methods
from the base class and once it's all wired
you will get the full algorithm experience
from within the base class.
Now I literally too I was going to talk about JDBC
and this is where I want to do that.
In the JDBC world for example there are several things
that must happen every time you go to the database
to get data.
You're going to start by creating a connection.
After you have the connection you're going to create
a statement.
You're then going to apply the SQL to your statement
and send that statement to the database.
The database will then return with data
which you will extract.
Once you've extracted that data you can then close down
your session by executing a rollback or a commit
if it's an update or just closing it down.
And at the very and you can close your connection.
So out of all of that there's lots of repetitive things
that happen every time and that's why the JDBC template
makes database calls that much easier.
And you'll find throughout the spring framework
that the same thing happens with from all
of the template classes that you're given
from the framework.